@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** 1. Introduction                                                 **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newchapter{Introduction}
This document describes the syntax, semantics and use of the COBOL programming language as implemented by GnuCOBOL.

The original principal developers of GnuCOBOL were Keisuke Nishida and Roger While. Since then, many members of the community have been involved in its development.

This document is intended to serve as a fully functional reference and light user's guide, suitable for both those readers learning COBOL for the first time as a light training tool, as well as those already familiar with another dialect of COBOL.

A separate manual --- containing only the basic details of the GnuCOBOL implementation and designed for experienced COBOL programmers --- has been taken from this guide. That document (@i{GnuCOBOL Quick Reference}) contains @i{no} training subject matter.

Another manual, that is based on this manual (Programmers Guide) is the Programmers Reference. This will have any training material removed so it will be a detailed Reference only. There are a few issues to overcome in that it uses currently the same text for the Guide and this will need changing in some areas in order to remove any training materials creating new text documents used as input to build this manual. This manual is intended for experienced Cobol programmers who require the details of the Cobol Language as pertaining to GnuCOBOL along with details of programming for GnuCOBOL specifically utilising the various platforms it can run on.

This manual fits in between the Programmer Guide and the (@i{GnuCOBOL Quick Reference}) which covers the skeletons of the Cobol Language as applied to GnuCOBOL.

Other documents that should be read is the @file{gnucobol.pdf} found in the @file{doc} directory of the compiler sources and the file @file{NEWS} supplied with the source code of the GnuCOBOL compiler, in the top-level directory. There you will find the latest COBOL language features that have been added, some of which may not be in this document due to time constraints. If you find any, please report it as a bug for the Programmer's Guide so that it can be fixed.

Yet another document which delves deeper in to the compiler that is a @i{must} read, is the FAQ available via the GnuCOBOL
@url{https://gnucobol.sourceforge.io/#faq, Manuals and Guides}, although it could do with a wee clean up to ease reading and finding required information but does include an index.

@iftex
@sp 3
@center ------------------------------------------------------------
@center End of Chapter 1 --- Introduction
@end iftex
