@comment *********************************************************************
@comment ** E. Summary of Document Changes                                  **
@comment *********************************************************************
@newappendix{Summary of Document Changes}
GnuCOBOL is an ever-evolving tool.  While all reasonable attempts will be made to maintain the currency of the information in this document, neither the author of this document nor the authors of the GnuCOBOL software extend any warranties of any kind for this document or for the information contained therein.

8th Edition on release of v3.2 with some updates for 4.0+.
Removed all update notes for 2021 - 23.

@enumerate

@item
2024

@item
12/01 Updated by lefessan, for mis-spelled SYNCHRONISED / SYNCHRONIZED in various places and other stuff not recorded by him. Added NEW file SYN-DD-SYNCHRONIZED.texi  and removed SYN-DD-SYNCRONIZED.texi that he missed.

@item
15/01 Updated 6.9.30 No-ECHO and 6.9.42 for error in descriptions and text.
15/01 Updated 7.8.1.4, 7.8.12.4 for CONTROL, COLOUR, COLOUR & GRAPHICS.
15/01 Updated with examples for ANNUITY and PRESENT-VALUE.

@item
30/01 More details for VALUE OF FILE-ID. Update to function x"91" and added options 11-12, 13-14, 15, 35, 46-49, 69.

@item
03/02 In 2.2.9 Relation Conditions added extra text for <>.

@item
06/02 Spurious item for Accept  7/8/1/4 CONTROL (8) removed.

@item
08/02 Description for OCCURS clause details for 01, 66, 77, 88 changed.

@item
25/02 7.8.1.4 ACCEPT -added CURSOR description, misspelling for storage, under SPECIAL-NAMES added extra sentence for CURSOR.

@item
26/02 Added CBL_GC_SET_SCR_SIZE under supported function and added it into System functions list file cbsyst.tex.

@item
27/02 Additions to Appendix C and D and 8.2 for missing functions but a few have no info as nothing is in NEWS worth speaking of as well as the Quick Ref doc.

@item
02/03 Text for Function Random updated plus an example demo of usage.

@item
03/03 In 6.9.61 USAGE layout, tidied up examples using typedef.

@item
09/03 In 8.2.58 EXTFH update syntax with minor description. Minor update to CBL_OPEN_FILE, CBL_CLOSE_FILE referencing where an example of use can be found in the Contribs folder.

@item
14/03 Updated descriptions for functions HIGHEST-ALGEBRAIC, LOWEST-ALGEBRAIC, B-SHIFT-R, B-SHIFT-RC, B-SHIFT-L and B-SHIFT-LC ditto in Quick Reference.

@item
15/03 Move all B-SHIFT to section 2 (as PD's) from Functions - they are not so. Ditto in QR.

@item
16/03 For B-NOT use operand-3 shown separately.

@item
16/04 Tidy up 7.8.1.4 Color and Control phrases a bit.

@item
23/04 Changed details for UNBOUNDED to only apply to LINKAGE SECTION. Updated diagrams for REPOSITORY. Added example for respository from FAQs.

@item
16/05 More chgs for REPOSITORY and prototypes -missed out 23/04.

@item
18/05 Reverted chg on SYN-ED-REPOSITORY.texi back to function and not prototype. Chg sub & section in 2.2 et al #943. Added JSON GENERATE, PARSE, XML GENERATE and PARSE. MORE TEXT REQUIRED <<<<<.

@item
20/05 Sub and sub section changes for 2.1.27 onwards.

@item
23/05 Updated text for ACCEPT ident. from LINE or COLUMN.

@item
26/05 Again updated text in .6 ACCEPT.

@item
27/05 In 5.2.1 SELECT option b should refer to IBM not mf, thanks Mark (Ruthe).

@item
03/06 Added note in Appendix A regarding user defined names allowed to be as long as 63 characters. Inline perform - remove optional tags [] as it is required.

@item
05/06 Correct CBL GET SCR SIZE to use BINARY-CHAR UNSIGNED same for all others and they are also changed namely CBL_GC_SET_SCR_SIZE, CBL GET SCR SIZE, CBL_GET_CSR_POS, CBL_SET_CSR_POS.

@item
12/06 at 7.8.8 COMPUTE added for boolean expression and updated text #974.

@item
29/06 Removed B-SHIFT from intrinstic lists. Clean up prime texi'files i.e., gnucobpg,pr,qr,sp) removing Appendixes E & F)

@item
04/07 Updated Occurs depending on formats 2 & 3. VERB/END VERB update to last example. TIMEOUT typo, 'tp' should be to. Example of picture P value should be 128000000 and not 000000128. Extra example for comma's showing usage of PICTURE Z. plus correction for first one. Corrected text regarding multiple floating symbols as gnucobol behaviour same as many other compilers. Corrections all thanks to Michael F Gleason.

@item
11/08 Typo's in section 6, 7 & 8 fixed thanks to Michael F Gleason.

@item
06/09 C$SLEEP change + example 2 and removed if/but type grammar as ambiguous. 6.9.50 SIZE add some text :)

@item
13/09 In section 4 for PROGRAM-ID and FUNCTION-ID extra text to warn NOT to use same names as in clib but to change case to upper ONLY, if really needed.

@item
28/09 In 10.2.3.5  Added COB_HIDE_CURSOR, In 7.8.43.1 SET ENVIRONMENT and 7.8.1.3 ACCEPT FROM ENVIRONMENT added extra texts. FR #479. Added routines CBL_GC_SCR_DUMP & CBL_GC_SCR_RESTORE to 8.2.FR #473.

@item
02/11 In appendix C remove reference to 1.3.15 - no longer exists.

@item
05/11 In Ch 10 for cobc help for --list-reserved, added 'and internal registers'

@item
11/11 In Identification Division within the OPTIONS text there were missing 2 periods and therefore Square braces missing.

@item
16/11 Updated layout for EXAMINE, covering optional elements more clearly.

@item
17/11 Updated Declaratives texts for readability etc.

@item
01/12 Changes for NO-ECHO and BEFORE-TIME clauses in sect 6.

@item
03/12 ACCEPT data-name & DISPLAY data-name, added EXCEPTION|ESCAPE for option 4. Changes to CALL so ALL variants are within one texi file deleting SYN-PD-CALL-arg.texi. For ENTRY ditto for ENTRY-Arg.texi. Text in 7.texi changed accordingly. In 7.4 INPUT used twice for SORT instead of 2nd as OUTPUT.

@item
07/12 Changes to SS-Data-Item, DD-Column-1/2, DD-Line-1/2, DD-TYPE diagrams. New: SPECIAL-NAMES in Data Division with SYN-DD-SPECIAL-NAMES.texi added & SYN-DD-Overview-Tex.texi deleted having changed 6.texi.

@item
09/12 Changes to SYN-PD-OPEN.texi, REWRITE and WRITE adding new text.

@item
13/12 Additions to SYN-DD-SS-Data-Item.texi - missing sub clauses, update to SYN-PD-ACCEPT-4.texi missing clauses. bugs 1033/35 - comment regarding DEFAULT is ignored as not true - default is overwrite. DD-DEFAULT added. Updated SYN-PD-DISPLAY-4.texi.

@item
12/24 INCLUDE added to CDF COPY clause. 78 NEXT added + example program.

@item
2025

@item
08/01 Removed all update notes for period 2021 to 2023. Removed references in section 6 for NO UPDATE and UPDATE as not used within SCREEN SECTION, ditto files SYN-DD-UPDATE.texi amd -NO-UPDATE.texi. Remove NO UPDATE from ACCEPT data-item (4) also change text for UPDATE as section 6 ref removed. Chg to SYN-DD-SS-Data-Item.texi.

@item
11/01 Minor textual change to ACCEPT Data-Item for UPDATE and DEFAULT - see as on 08/01.

@item
13/01 CDF >>DEFINE OFF has an additional sentence added.

@item
22/01 Removed SCROLL UP / DOWN as not available in screen section in sections 6 & 7 points for ACCEPT.

@item
23/01 Removed reference to OPENCOBOL in chapter 10. In 10.2.3 included def. for "OS". Removed incorrect [ ] in Chap 6 - there are a lot more though in other chapters :(.

@item
05/02 Updated SYN-PD-ACCEPT-4 and DISPLAY-4.

@item
16/02 Correct info for calls CBL_ALARM_SOUND and CBL_BELL_SOUND by removing "USING".

@item
08/03 FR #486. Adjust DD-SS-Date-ITem.texi.

@item
19/03 Adjusted >>SOURCE to read 73-80 and not 72-80.

@item
28/03 Added SET Indentifier and SET FCD and KEY DEFINITION BLOCK for PG, PR and QR.

@item
05/04 Updated OPEN syntax to show support for multiple file usage.

@end enumerate
